# ssbm-lotto-rng-manip

This is a project aimed at understanding SSBM's lottery minigame, as well as the underlying rng functions that SSBM uses.

Watch the below video for a live example.

https://youtu.be/nilRjbvIG4Y


# Check Out Other SSBM Tools!

https://github.com/Olivia926/All_Trophies_Help

That's the collection of tools which are relevant to SSBM's All Trophies any% speedrun.

For the time being, I'll keep this repo updated since I prefer working with smaller repos, which I'll then merge into that repo.

# Getting Started
You *should*, and big emphasis on *should* use pypy instead of Python. The reason is simple: the first iteration of the rss algorithm goes over all 4.3+ billion possible seeds. The algorithm does quickly decrease in the volume of computations after that, but if you use regular Python, it'll take a ridiculous amount of time to finish the very first computation. Because I don't feel like dealing with managing memory myself, I wrote this in Python and not C. The good news is that pypy basically converts Python to C in a smart way, and then runs the translated code, which runs way faster, while also having vastly improved garbage collection strategies compared to other libraries like Cython.

## Setting up pypy
First, head over to https://www.pypy.org/download.html and select the desired version of pypy for whatever OS you're using. Then, extract the folder.
From here, I just decided to place the pypy folder *inside* of my Python310 folder, that way I wouldn't lose where my pypy is. Fortunately, the current available version of pypy is 3.10 as well, which is perfect. For example, my folder is located at: `C:\Python310\pypy3.9-v7.3.11-win64`.

## Using pypy as the interpreter
In VSC, take a look at the bottom left of the window where it says something like `3.10.X`, which is your current Python version (it's to the RIGHT of `Python`, and NOT the `Python` text itself), and click on it. In the top-middle of your screen should be a dropdown asking you to select your interpreter. Here, you're going to want to click `Find Interpreter Path` and then click `Browse`, then navigate to the pypy folder, and then select the `pypy.exe` within the pypy folder. Now you're all set up!

---

## TODO (ordered by importance):
- Improve alg for lotto sim to minimize time spent (and also coins spent, if reasonable)
- Implement course correction (e.g. calculate the current seed after misinputting the number of coins and rerun the algorithm)
- Modify or create a new function to be used where the user is looking to unlock ALL trophies via the lotto (at the end of the speedrun)
- Implement multiprocessing for rss

For those curious about RSS (random seed search):
RSS is a type of algorithm that aims to find the current random seed, or rng value, of the current game via a sequence of inputs which involve random events. This is important because the rng value will determine what the outcome of a "random" event is. For example, if someone wants a random integer, the random seed will be involved. Additionally, due to previous work from the community, we know how the random seed is used in *some* functions, and using Dolphin's debugger, the random seed can be directly accessed in memory. However, when it comes to speedruns, accessing specific values in the game's memory via an external tool is not viable, hence the requirement to somehow determine what the random seed is by using a sequence of random in-game events.

---
# An In-Depth Explanation of SSBM's RNG system
As you can probably gather from quite a few different sources around the internet, the rng system used by Melee relies on a value being stored and being manipulated by certain functions to produce some desired values. To be more precise, the RNG value, or seed, is at the heart of what drives randomness, and we know that this value advances in a somewhat linear way, via a function called a Linear Congruent Generator. The purpose of the LCG function is to attempt to return every single value from 0 up to some limit, which in SSBM's case is $2^{32}$, such that no value is repeated along the way, and the values returned are in some generally "random" order. That means that naive approaches which would simply list $0$ through $2^{32} - 1$ would be far too "predictable" when it comes to random events. As a result, a better way of going about this would be to use an LCG, which you can easily Google or search on Wikipedia as it is a common and fairly simple topic in the field of cryptography.

In Melee, the LCG has already been discovered to be the following function:

$seed = ((a * seed) + c) \% m$

Where $a = 214013$, $c = 2531011$, and $m = 2^{32}$.

As previously stated however, this is only the heart of what is used to generate random events. The next step is to use this seed to generate a desired number. For example, if we want to pull a random number from $[0, 100)$ (that is, including $0$ and excluding $100$), but our seed value is $123456$, Melee doesn't say that the random number that we get from $[0, 100)$ is just $123456$. Instead, Melee calls a function that takes our current seed, manipulates it to generate a number within the ranges of $[0, 100)$, and then returns that newly generated number.

There are two functions where this happens, both of which have been named by the community, but I personally call them the `get_rand_int()` and `get_rand_float()` functions (to be explicit, they are the "get random integer" and "get random float" functions). As noted by Savestate, the `get_rand_int()` function is used generally more often for purposes that we're interested in, whereas `get_rand_float()` seems to have something to do with CPU behavior, but I haven't been able to get any more info on that function. Regardless, we have our sights set on the `get_rand_int()` function, and this is what we're most interested in right now.

## So How Does This Tie Into The Lottery?
From messing around with the lottery using some of Judge9's scripts, Dolphin-memory-engine, and Dolphin's debugging mode, I was able to figure out that the lottery causes the seed to change by 7 intervals every time 1 coin was used to perform a single roll. That number then changed to 10 intervals per 2 coins for a single roll, 13 coins for a single roll, and so on. I then managed to make some reasonable guesses as to how the rng functions were involved in the lottery minigame:

`3 steps` (aka 3 calls to the `get_rand_int()` function) would be performed per each coin, to randomize where their `x`, `y`, and `z` coordinates are when they spawn in for the animation where they enter the lottery machine. After those $3 *$ `number of coins spent` steps are made, then one call is made to determine the success or failure of the roll (that is, whether the trophy is new or not), then one call to determine the actual trophy that the player will receive, and then one call to determine the pose of the trophy (as some trophies have multiple poses). We can make a simple table to illustrate what the internal system looks like and what functions are being called when we roll for a trophy using only **ONE** coin:

| Table 1: Lottery Actions and RNG Calls |
|------------------------------------------|

| Action Number |  Seed  |     Description of Action    |            Actual Function Being Called           |
|:-------------:|:------:|:----------------------------:|:-------------------------------------------------:|
|       0       | seed_0 |            Nothing           |                      Nothing                      |
|       1       | seed_1 | Generating Coin X coordinate |                 `get_rand_int(15)`                |
|       2       | seed_2 | Generating Coin Y coordinate |                 `get_rand_int(15)`                |
|       3       | seed_3 | Generating Coin Z coordinate |                 `get_rand_int(15)`                |
|       4       | seed_4 |   Roll for Success/Failure   |                 *explained later*                 |
|       5       | seed_5 |        Roll for Trophy       |                 *explained later*                 |
|       6       | seed_6 |          Trophy Pose         | tbh didn't feel like writing this one down so idk |
|       7       | seed_7 |            Nothing           |                      Nothing                      |

Note here that the table isn't totally linear. Instead, it's meant to be interpreted as follows: `seed_0` is passed into the action at Action Number 1, and `seed_1` is the seed *after* the action at Action Number 1 is completed. To say this a different way, `seed_0` is passed into the `get_rand_int(15)` function, which then *advances* the seed to become whatever `seed_1` is, while also returning some random integer in the range $[0, 15)$.

If we instead think about this in a more continuous way via a loop, we can basically "connect" `seed_7` above and `seed_0`, and let a function simply loop over all of this, which allows us to effectively predict what the RNG value will be at each step of the lottery. Therefore, all that's left is to figure out how exactly the RNG values are used by the `get_rand_int()` functions, and how we can fully simulate the lottery minigame itself!

# Figuring Out The Lottery

In simulating the lottery, we know that the RNG values are predictable at each step, and because we know exactly how the `get_rand_int()` functions work, we can also figrue out exactly what those functions return, which means that there shouldn't be anything else that we have to worry about... right?

Nope! This gets a bit more complicated, but also significantly more interesting. The trophies that a player can get are split up into a few different categories. These are:

| Table 2: Lottery Trophy Categories |
|------------------------------------------|

|              Category Name             | Abbreviation | # of Trophies |
|:--------------------------------------:|:------------:|:-------------:|
|                1p/lotto                |     `1PL`    |       72      |
|                 1p Only                |     `1PO`    |       27      |
|           Lotto only initial           |     `LOI`    |       12      |
|        Lotto only after 1p clear       |    `LO1P`    |       23      |
|   Lotto only after all chars unlocked  |     `LOC`    |       10      |
|         Lotto only after 200 vs        |    `LOVS`    |       16      |
| Lotto only after 250 trophies unlocked |     `LOT`    |       4       |
|            Special Trophies            |     `ST`     |       48      |

The first two categories are the 1p categories, but the special thing about the first category is that the trophies that spawn in 1p modes must belong to that first category. Therefore, it would be ideal to pick up as many of the `1PL` trophies as possible before trying to get all the `1PO` trophies. All of the trophies that involve the lottery are trophies that can only be found in the lottery, with the exception of the first category. And all of the `ST` trophies are unlocked by completing different "achievements" of sorts, such as the Diskun trophy, which requires completing every Bonus except for the 1 million VS matches bonus. Here we can see that the total number of trophies that a player can get from just the lottery and 1p mode is $212$. Then, there are $3$ fighter trophies per fighter, making for $3 * 26$ (including Shiek) $= 78$ trophies, which combined with $212$ gives a total of $290$ trophies: the exact number of trophies needed in order to complete the speedrun.

## How Does Melee Use RNG In The Lottery?

From these categories and requirements, we can now figure out how many trophies are available inside the Lottery. For example, at the very beginning of the game, there are $2$ lottery categories available: `1PL` and `LOI`, which gives a total of $84$ possible trophies. When the game starts for the first time on a new save, it automatically gives the player a random trophy from the `1PL` category. That means that on a new save, $\frac{83}{84}$ trophies are available in the lottery. This fraction is exactly what the game uses to determine whether a new trophy should be rolled or not; it takes the number of unowned trophies of the current number of possible lottery trophies and divides it by the current number of possible lottery trophies. So, since the initial lottery pool is `1PL` and `LOI`, there are $72 + 12 = 84$ possible trophies, and since $1$ trophy is given to the player on the launch of the game, we get: $\frac{84 - 1}{84} = \frac{83}{84}$ as the probability that a player gets a new trophy from the lottery, which we'll call `chance`. In **Table 1**, action state 4, which is the roll for success or failure is exactly what happens here: the `get_rand_int(100)` function is called and if the value returned is strictly less than `chance`, then the roll is a success. Fun fact: the probability of getting a new trophy is actually just $\lfloor$`chance`$\rfloor$, that is, `chance` rounded down to the nearest whole number (which is the same as `chance` with the decimals truncated).

## Why Not Get Every Possible Trophy?

Now that we know if we get a new trophy versus an old trophy, does it even matter what trophy we get? The answer is that the actual trophy that we get doesn't matter as much as the category that the trophy belongs to. Referring to **Table 2**, we can see that there are quite a few categories, but each of these categories actually unlock within the lottery in the order that they're listed (with the exception of `1PO` and `ST` not being unlockable in the lottery). The exact function for how this happens isn't fully known since I didn't spend a lot of time exploring it, but the behavior is known and works as follows. `1PL` and `LOI` both fill the lottery system to begin, for a total of $84$ trophies. Once all the trophies in the `LOI` category (and yes, specifically the `LOI` category only) are owned by the player, then the `LOIP` category is unlocked, regardless of the requirement being fulfilled, thus increasing the total number of trophies in the lottery to $107$. Then, after ALL $107$ trophies from `1PL`, `LOI`, and `LOIP` are owned, then the $16$ trophies from the `LOVS` category are added, also bypassing the requirement being fulfilled. After all the trophies from the `LOVS` category are owned, then the $10$ trophies from the `LOC` category are added, regardless of the requirement being fulfilled. At this point, the very last category that can be added to the lottery is the `LOT` category, which has only $4$ trophies, but unlike all the aforementioned categories, the `LOT` category *only unlocks from the player owning 250 trophies*.

Unfortunately, simply unlocking every trophy from the lottery is not the best way about this. The reason is because of how the routing works: ideally all the trophies from the `1PL` category are gathered from the lottery, such that a runner can go ahead and grind out the trophies in the `1PO` category. The reason why this is considered a grind is because the approach for gathering the `1PO` trophies is still rather primitive; and the most recent world record (Olivia's 14h24m27s) used a strategy involving Puff in order to gather trophies by stomping on every goomba in the first stage of Adventure mode (aka "Adventure 1-1") while looking for the trophy that spawns on the stage, which I recently found was significantly slower than just using Falcon, which Olivia also combined with focusing on primarily gathering the trophy that spawns on the stage instead, which saves a significant amount of time. Some preliminary testing was done to see what trophies would spawn on Adventure 1-1, and it was discovered that `1PO` trophies would be more likely to spawn if the trophies in the `1PL` were already owned, which would save more time, however, I recently discovered that the trophies that spawn on the stage can be manipulated via rng, but quite a few more hours across multiple days will have to go into that in order for us to figure out how to better optimize that segment. And going back to the lottery, as explained in the previous paragraph, getting the trophies in the `LOI` category will increase the number of trophies in the lottery, thus decreasing the likelihood of getting the remaining trophies from the `1PL` category.

I'm not actually sure if this segment is useful because of the fact that the stage trophies themselves can simply be RNG manip'd, but I'll continue on with our current assumption that a runner will get the `1PL` trophies and then complete the `1PO` category, and then return to the lottery at the end of the run. Regardless, this sets up the foundation for the problem at hand, and it perfectly sets up how action state 5 from **Table 1** works (the roll for the actual trophy): it calls `get_rand_int(rem_trophies)`, where `rem_trophies` is the number of remaining trophies in the current lottery pool which are not yet owned by the player. This is the most complex part of the problem because it's a variable, and it also means that the result changes depending on the current state, thus expanding this from a problem of "How do we guarantee that we get a new trophy each time?" to "Now that I know we roll a new trophy, how do I make sure we get the exact trophy that we want?" type of problem.

Melee also approaches this in a somewhat strange way: it holds a list of all possible trophies, and of the trophies that are currently able to be gotten in the lottery, it sets a flag to true or false. Then, it also keeps track of which trophy is currently owned. Now when a number, which we'll call `num`, is rolled between $[0, $ `rem_trophies`$)$ (by the `get_rand_int(rem_trophies)` function call, as mentioned earlier), the game then loops over all *unowned* trophies while counting until it hits the number `num` from earlier, at which point it picks the current trophy and tells some other functions to display that trophy, which is what action state 6 is: a roll for the trophy pose when it's displayed on screen. Technically the fastest way to handle this would be to benchmark how long each trophy pose takes to render, as it may be possible that not all trophy poses render in the same amount of time, possibly in the same way how something like a Kirby Hat 1 trophy takes significantly longer than a Capsule trophy, as the time for certain shaders to compute over a different set of polygons might be something to think about. Regardless, it may not be worth thinking about over some other factors which I'll mention soon. Also, another way to think about how the game finds which trophy to return is by thinking about it keeping two lists; the list of unowned trophies in the current lottery pool, such that the int returned by `get_rand_int(rem_trophies)` can give you the trophy returned by using that as the index in the list. For memory concerns, it's technically more ideal to just reuse the existing list and keep a flag (aka a boolean) to keep track of whether a trophy is owned or not. And fortunately, this logic is also very similar for if the roll is unsuccessful; I forgot to mention earlier that this entire paragraph is running under the assumption that the roll for success/failure (action state 4 from **Table 1**) is successful. In the case that the roll is unsuccessful, the game runs a function call via `get_rand_int(num_owned_trophies)`, where  `num_owned_trophies` is the number of owned trophies, as the name suggests, and the previous logic can be translated for how the game determines which duplicate trophy should be returned, however, we don't really have to worry about this since it's generally not worth computing or worrying about.

# Main Recap

Now that all of this has been said, there are three major things to focus on inside of the fact that there are $3 *$ `num_coins` $+ 3$ rng advances when a lottery roll happens. The first is that we need to keep track of ensuring that a roll is successful. The second is that we need to keep track of the fact that the trophy that we get is desired, aka it should be in the `1PL` category, and not the `LOI` category. And lastly, the previous concern is dependent on what trophies the player currently has. The last point is the most important, as because a player can input up to $20$ coins in one lottery roll, if we wish to compute the most optimal way for a player to get all $71$ (because one trophy is already owned given to the player when booting the game) `1PL` trophies, that would take $20^{71}$ computations, purely for figuring out what the results are. This doesn't even bring into the picture the concern about memory, RAM, computation power, let alone the fact that it's many magnitudes larger than the number of atoms in the obeservable universe (a quick search says $10^{78}$ to $10^{82}$). So, like any other normal person, I've implemented a greedy algorithm that simply searches for the first possible number of coins that's needed to unlock a `1PL` trophy, and if no trophy can be found within a $20$ coin window, then I tell the player to "reset", which is, to simply input $1$ coin: a cheap way to change the current RNG value such that a set of up to $20$ new possibilities can be computed.

# Further Algorithmic Analysis Of Lotto Sim

One thing that can be noticed when running my script is that towards the end of collecting all `1PL` trophies, there may be a lot of "resets" (where the player is instructed to simply insert $1$ coin to get a duplicate trophy such that the RNG is advanced at minimal cost). In this case, resets can end up being extremely expensive; a quick test of the greedy algorithm running over all possible seeds ($2^{32}$, or about $4.2$ billion seeds) resulted in the minimum number of coins to get just the $72$ trophies from the `1PL` category being a range of $130$ to $536$ coins, which is an incredibly large range, which also costs a ridiculous amount of time in the absolute worst case, let alone the sheer amount of time it takes to roll $500+$ coins. Because of how much more difficult it becomes in order for the greedy algorithm to find a new `1PL` trophy through running $20$ calculations, deciding to just spend $1$ coin, then repeating that until a new trophy is found, I realized that it would make more sense to instead spend more time computing possibilities, because at this point of the current series of calculations, it doesn't make sense to optimize solely for speed.

## So What's The Fastest Way To Get The Trophies From The Lottery?

Because this is meant to be used for a speedrun and not just a showcase, optimizations will be necessary. Before we discuss possibilities, it's important to first define how speed even works in the lottery. So far, it's clear that adding more coins into the lottery machine takes more time, as each additional coin beyond $1$ coin will play an animation where it has to enter the machine. Additionally, the $3$ RNG calls per coin can also change the position of the coin, which might delay the start of the lottery animation. This is not entirely known, but also may not be worth considering, as the time it would save would most likely not be worth it, as we can simply aim to spend the fewest coins necessary. This is one of the first "minimization" goals that we can have with this algorithm: simply minimize the number of coins spent, and everything should be fine, right?

The problem with this approach can be seen with the above analysis of my greedy implementation: it works fairly reasonably with early trophies, but the big problem really kicks in towards the last 10 trophies or so.

Another minimization problem that we can consider is minimizing the number of rolls that have to be made, but this problem is extremely complex because each roll creates a new universe of possibilities: for example, if we get a Barrel Trophy by spending $1$ coin, but we get a Barrel Trophy by spending $2$ coins, then all subsequent trophies in each scenario will be different because the index of each trophy after the one that was received would be different, and so on. One could even call it a set of 20 parallel universes which open up, or perhaps 20 possible universes collide at this multiverse junction such that only one can be chosen to be the desired path, which is fairly reasonable considering the fact that the sheer number of computations to fully analyze all possibilities would simply be $20^n$, where $n$ is the number of rolls that are being made.

Minimizing the number of rolls is probably even more important than just minimizing the number of coins spent, as the fewest number of rolls means that the least amount of time is spent rolling. For example, rolling $1$ coin costs about $3$ seconds, and even rolling $20$ coins costs about $5$ seconds. Therefore, rolling $20$ coins ends up taking even less than rolling $1$ coin twice, although there is the added cost of having to farm coins. That being said, being able to roll fewer times will generally save more time; consider the difference between resetting $3$ times and spending $1$ coin afterwards, which is $4$ rolls, or approximately $12$ seconds. If we can simply roll once and spend, for example, $20$ coins, it would only take $5$ seconds instead, which is a timesave that adds up at the end of this lottery segment, since it could happen multiple times. Also, depending on the number of times that a reset would occur, it could possibly even save on coins.

## *"Trees? Why did it have to be trees?" - Timbersaw (Dota 2)*

So what's the most reasonable approach that can be taken towards solving this problem? Well, if there's a series of $20$ paths that *sprout* from a starting point, and $20$ more paths that *branch* off of each of those paths, then the problem becomes rather familiar for anyone who has studied algorithms in Computer Science. It's a tree problem!

The entire problem can now be structured in the following way. Let each node consist of the set of trophies that are owned, the RNG value after the roll happens, the total number of coins spent, a list of the number of coins spent at each node corresponding with the trophy received from each roll, the current number of trophies available in the lottery, and the number of trophies owned (of the trophies available in the lottery). The number of trophies that have yet to be owned of the trophies available in the lottery can be derived from the last two variables, so we don't *have* to keep track of it, but it wouldn't hurt to save it as a variable as well. Now, the last thing to consider is that as we think about each branch in the tree, the height of any node is also the number of rolls which must happen, with the root node starting at height $0$. Therefore, we can easily keep track of how many rolls must happen in order to end up at a certain gamestate. Keeping in mind that our end goal is to simply get all the desired trophies from the lottery and not necessarily to get every trophy possible, we can safely stop doing computations once we've unlocked all the trophies that we want. Putting this all together, we're looking for the first leaf, or the earliest leaf at the least height. This way, we guarantee that taking that path down the tree results in getting each of the desired trophies while also being the path that requires the least number of rolls, which *generally* saves more time than a path that requires the least number of coins. If any two leaves end at the same height, then it can be worth comparing the total number of coins spent along the path, which is being tracked in each node to save time, at the cost of a bit of space.

Another interesting idea is to simply compute in batches, according to what the shortest possible path could be. For example, if we're only computing the last $3$ trophies, we can simply stop after computing $20^3 = 8000$ posibilities, and then keep track of the leaves, as well as any nodes which would continue should we compute another layer of the tree. The idea is that there might be a path down the tree that only requires $3$ rolls, or in other words, there might be a way to get $3$ new trophies in just $3$ rolls, instead of having to reset. Then if leaves exist in the last layer, we can check them each and find the one that takes the fewest number of coins. If there are no leaves in the last layer, then we can simply start computing the next batch. The largest concern here is the amount of space that will be taken up, but some tricks will be used to save space. Note that each node at the last layer is not automatically a leaf as the tree is only computed up to a certain depth, but we can determine if a node is a leaf by keeping track of whether the number of `1PL` trophies unlocked is equal to $72$, since there are $72$ `1PL` trophies.

This, in essence, is the same problem that we were concerned with earlier which required more computations than there are atoms in the observable universe, but instead on such a smaller scale that we can reasonably compute this without much of a worry. Fortunately we can also scale this up a little bit, dependent on the speed of certain CPUs via multiprocessing, since my implementations are in Python, and it bypasses the GIL, which locks the process to a single CPU core which multithreading can't get around, whereas multiprocessing allows each CPU core to compute each set of problems which are sent to it. Additionally, because a runner has to actually input these rolls and wait for the animations to play out, there's quite a few minutes of rolling that will happen before a runner even gets to the last few trophies. That means that our program has quite a few *minutes* to be hard at work computing millions of possibilities in the meantime. Even with a single core, I think it's possible to compute the last $6$ trophies in time, which is $20^6 = 64,000,000$ computations using pypy.

## Potential Optimizations

Since the previous algorithm hasn't been added yet, there are a few optimizations that have to be considered, each of which can generally save time, but we can split this into two categories: one is for runtime, and the other is for space (in particular, RAM). The first is the fact that we have to keep track of $64,000,000$ things throughout our computations, which takes a lot of space. This could be simplified a bit, as each set of trophies really builds on top of each previous result, which means that we can temporarily save some previously computed information (and in fact, we basically *have* to do this, since we're splitting up computations into chunks anyways). One idea that I have right now is to keep a list of lists, with each possible scenario being linked to each sublist by index, for example, the base list will have depth $1$, which is just set of results indexed from $1$ through $20$ inclusive, with the $0$ index being an empty list so the coins are aligned to their corresponding index. Using this, it may be possible then modify each list in the list to then be a tuple of a list (initially empty) of the following values, plus the values at the current node, alongside some values to help trace back up the tree to determine the path that is being taken, from the root of the tree to the desired leaf. It would probably be better to use an actual object instead, but I'm not sure how the overhead fares against having a less clear approach similar to what I described, but we'll see how the implmentation goes.

The last implementation that would be extremely helpful to have is multiprocessing, as previously mentioned, which would enable different parts of a program to be run on multiple cores, which should speed up computation times immensely. My only concern is whether this is still compatible with pypy, in which case it may be worth switching over to CPython or Cython.

# Reverse Seed Search (RSS): A New Type Of Problem

RSS is a new type of algorithm aimed at finding the RNG value of the game without using any external tools which rely on reading the actual RNG value. This is important because it prevents runners from directly manipulating the game's RNG value off screen, such that they get more desirable events which would not normally happen without direct memory manipulation. As a result, designing an algorithm to efficiently and correctly determine what the RNG value is via in-game events is important.

This type of algorithm already exists, but was first implemented by Judge9 using the character select screen (CSS), as randoming a new character would advance the RNG 2 times consistently, which made for a relatively straightforward algorithm which would search for the RNG value that would result in getting a specific sequence of characters. The minimum length of a sequence of random characters to determine what the RNG seed is $9$, but keep in mind that the total number of possible seeds is $2^{32}$, which is approximately $4.3$ *billion* values to try. Fortunately there are only 25 possible values to keep track of, which makes the program generally simple but still very helpful to have. More information can be found in Judge9's video here: https://youtu.be/wuLz2QptDkY. I would highly recommend watching this as it gives a great overview of the CSS RSS problem and how it was approached. TauKhan also implemented a similar algorithm, albeit with a large amount of optimizations in order to achieve ridiculously quick times. Unfortunately they didn't post the code, so it isn't used, but Judge9's algorithm is more than enough and is used routinely for Peach's Break The Targets (BTT) speedrun, as well as a few other custom BTT Mismatch stages intended for Peach.

The next type of RSS algorithm is TagRSS, where generating player tags using the random button would advance the RNG 1 time. This problem quickly advanced to be significantly more complex however, due to the fact that the game would keep a list of the 5 most recent tags, and the game would continue rolling for a tag that isn't already in the list. As a result, there's a lot more complexity to the issue since rerolls would have to be accounted for, and all the player can see are the results of a roll and not the number of times a reroll would happen. As a result, I felt deterred and decided to skip this problem, but luckily TauKhan quickly picked up the problem and once again implemented an insanely optimized approach (also in Python) that solves the problem ridiculously quickly. TauKhan's algorithm takes the 5 tags that a player rolls and figures out what the seed is by splitting up the possible seeds into buckets and determining whether certain seeds are viable by performing a series of linear transforms, which is generally predictable due to the nature of working with linear functions (recall that Melee's RNG uses an LCG, which is linear). This code can be seen in Olivia's large repo collection here: https://github.com/Olivia926/All_Trophies_Help.

And last but not least is my own RSS algorithm, or LottoRSS, designed specifically using the lottery functions that I previously described. The implmentation is fairly stupid and involves quite a bit of brute force, but it does get the job done (only with pypy though, as it takes quite literally forever with Python). This one is far more straightforward, as it simply involves determining the RNG by inputting the trophies that a player already has, and then inputting whatever trophies are returned by the lottery until the algorithm determines what seed the game is currently on. This is done by keeping track of whether the trophy received was a duplicate trophy, which means that we know that the roll for success or failure was a failure, and that the subsequent roll for the trophy gave a specific value, thus greatly narrowing the list of possible seeds as the probability of getting a duplicate is extremely low at the beginning of using the lottery. In the case that a trophy is not a duplicate, there are many more possible seeds, but the trophy that's received will still shrink the possible list of seeds considerably. Additionally, repeating this process will eventually determine what the current seed is; usually around 5 rolls are enough to figure out what the seed is. Considering that the current implementation is rather slow, it may be worth simply using TauKhan's TagRSS algorithm and then inputting that into my lotto sim function to bypass the slow LottoRSS algorithm that I currently have.

# Thank You For Reading!

Chances are, I probably didn't explain something very well, or you might have questions. In that case, feel free to reach out to me!

Here's a list of people whose work I used along the way: Savestate, achilles1515, PracticalTAS, TauKhan, and gainge (aka Judge9).

This project would have never been possible if not for them, and a special shoutout to David V. Kimball for making his documentary video on Melee's All Trophies category, and for all the work that he's put into getting this to work in the first place.

Additionally, shoutouts to the Stadium Discord for being an awesome place where other speedrunners can enjoy a variety of different categories belonging to the same game and for being so welcoming to newcomers like myself who have tons of questions!

<3